.sp .5i
.ll 80
.ps 14p
.vs 16p
.ce
SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS FOR 4P-ROM ADAPTER
.br
.ps 10p
.vs 11p
.ce
Please read this page before installing your 4P-ROM.
.br


To help keep our product cost down, we provide the 4P-ROM
with a special adapter socket.  This adapter allows us to use newer,
commonly-available EPROMs instead of the type originally used by your system.

When you reach the point in the instructions where it directs you to
install the
new 4P-ROM in the socket, simply plug the adapter (with the 4P-ROM already
attached) into the socket as the instructions indicate.   If the adapter bumps
up against the 40 pin chip adjacent to the ROM socket, remove that chip
from its socket, and re-insert it, making sure the chip is positioned as
far away from the ROM socket as it will go.  Once this is done, the 4P-ROM
adapter will fit.  (We advise against cutting part of the adapter off to make
it fit and will not exchange a damaged adapter.)

If you have a SmartWatch installed in the boot ROM socket inside
your computer, follow these steps:
.br
.in .5i
.ti -.5i
1.	Remove the SmartWatch from your existing system and remove the old ROM.

.ti -.5i
2.	Remove and discard all jumper wires or adapter sockets that were used to
provide power and other signals to the SmartWatch.  These are no longer
necessary and could prevent proper operation.

.ti -.5i
3.	Carefully remove the new 4P-ROM from the adapter.  When handling
the adapter, take extra care to not bend the pins on the other
side of the adapter.  You might want to stick the pins into a piece of foam
while working with the adapter.

.ti -.5i
4.	Plug the SmartWatch into the adapter.  There is a "1" and "notch"
marking on the adapter to indicate proper insertion.  Note that the
zero-profile sockets on the adapter require that the pins be aligned
exactly.  If the SmartWatch is resisting being inserted, one or more pins are
not lining up.  When the pins are lined-up, the SmartWatch will plug in
easily.

.ti -.5i
5.	Plug the new 4P-ROM into the top of the SmartWatch.  Remember to
place pin 1 of the new 4P-ROM into pin 3 of the SmartWatch.  The old ROM was
plugged-into the same position in the SmartWatch.

.ti -.5i
6.	Now follow the original instructions and insert the adapter,
SmartWatch and new 4P-ROM as a single unit.

.in 0i
Special Cases:
.br
The combination of the adapter and ROM are taller than the old
ROM by itself.  If your Model 4P has a built-in modem or a Microlabs
HIRES board, these boards may prevent the ROM/adapter combination from
being used.  If you have had a SmartWatch
installed in your system, the additional height should not be a problem.

.br
The new ROM can be used without an adapter provided you are willing to
apply two jumpers to your system (soldering is required).  If you want to
do this, here are the instructions.

.in .5i
.ti -.5i
1.	Remove the 4P-ROM from the adapter.  The adapter should be saved for
future use and not discarded.

.ti -.5i
2.	On the 4P-ROM, bend pins 18 and 21 out slightly, just enough so that
these pins 
will not go back into the socket when the chip is reinserted.  The pins
are numbered counter-clockwise when looking at the top of the chip, with the
notch or divot on the left-hand side.  Pin 1 is at the bottom left and pin 13
is at the upper right.

.ti -.5i
3.	Using a small piece of fine wire (wire-wrap wire is recommended),
run a jumper from pin 18 to pin 12 on the chip.  Run the wire over
the top of the chip and watch for shorts with the other pins.  Pin 12 must
still be able to go into the socket, so make your connection close to the
body of the chip and keep it neat.  Keep soldering time under 10 seconds
on each pin.

.ti -.5i
4.	Attach a piece of 4-inch wire to pin 21 on the 4P-ROM.   The other
end of the wire connects to different places depending on what type of
CPU board you have:
.nf
		On a non-gate-array Model 4P, connect the wire to Pin 2 on U112
		or to the pass/thru right next to the U90 label on the board.

		On a gate-array Model 4P, connect the wire to Pin 2 on U111.

.fi
If you have an OHM-meter, confirm your connection by looking for less than
1 OHM of resistance between the wire and pin 18 (yes, we really mean pin 18)
of the SOCKET (not the chip) for the 4P-ROM.  If you don't see this reading,
there is a problem.

.ti -.5i
5.	Insert the 4P-ROM, noting the position of Pin 1.  Make sure that
all pins except 18 and 21 go into the socket.  Pay extra attention to Pin 12.

.in 0i
If the adapter and the modification are unacceptable to you, return the
adapter, ROM, documentation, diskettes and packaging.  We will refund the
purchase price.


008281 Revised 203282

