\"Updated 9-Jul-90
.lg 0
.de bx
.ds B \(br\|\s-2\fB\\$1\fP\s+2\|\(br
.nr X 0-\w'\\*B'
\&\\*B\l'\\nXu\(rn'\l'\\nXu\(ul'\c
.rr X
.rm B
..
.de en
\\$1\c
\fB\s-2\(br\|BREAK\|\(br\l'|0\(rn'\l'|0\(ul'\s+2\fR 
..
.sp .5i
.ps 16p
.vs 18p
.ce
ENHANCED MODEL 4P BOOT ROM (4P-ROM)
.br
.ps 13p
.vs 14p
.ce
Installation Instructions
.br
.ce
Copyright 1990, M. A. D. Software, All Rights Reserved.
.sp
.ps 10p
.vs 11p

\s+2What you should know before starting the installation\s-2

There are several versions of the 4P-ROM.  Each one is configured to
work with a particular type of disk controller.  The label on the
package and any accompanying diskette will indicate which one you have.
If this is not
the correct part for your computer, do not open the package and it can
be exchanged for the correct part.

Installing the 4P-ROM requires that you disassemble your computer.
When you do this, the "warranty seal" will be broken.  The strictest reading
of the Radio Shack repair policy is that any remaining warranty (original
or a repair warranty) will be void if the seal is broken, and if the computer 
is ever repaired again by Radio Shack, the technicians may remove or replace
any "alien" components to restore the unit to its original state.

However, in 1982 Ed Juge (the Press Officer of Radio Shack/Tandy)
clarified how "alien" modifications are handled by
Radio Shack Service Centers.  In "TRS-80 Microcomputer News", July/August
1982, and in "80-US", May 1982, Mr. Juge states that Radio Shack will
service a computer with a modification and will ignore it if doesn't seem
to be hurting anything.  If the modification prevents the technician
from properly testing the unit, they may ask you for permission to remove
it. 

It is also possible
that some future repair may require the CPU board be exchanged and the
technician may not notice that you have a different boot ROM
in your
computer and may fail to move it to the replacement
board.  To avoid this, be sure to tell the technician that you have the
new boot ROM installed.  Be sure this
gets written down on the repair ticket in case a different person ends up
working on your computer. 


\s+2Installation\s-2

As discussed above, installing the 4P-ROM requires your computer
to be disassembled.  The entire job can be done in about 30 minutes. 
Read through the following steps and if the procedure seems beyond your
capabilities, seek help from a local computer shop, TV repair store or
local college.

The installation instructions are written for the person who has never
disassembled a Model 4P before, but is able to perform repairs
on the car or the toaster.   If you have installed a battery-powered
clock in your computer or changed a disk drive, the instructions need
only be skimmed.  Otherwise, read each step entirely and then perform
the action.  It is suggested that you place a check mark next to
each step as it is completed so that you won't skip anything.


\s+2Installing the 4P-ROM\s-2

.in .5i
.ti -.5i
1.	You will need a medium-sized Phillips screwdriver, a small
flat-blade screwdriver (1/4" wide tip or smaller), a large
towel (or towels) that will cover a 3' x 3' area, and a
table or workbench with at least 3' x 3' of space.  A flashlight or
other light source may be helpful.

.ti -.5i
2.	Place the cloth or towel over the area that is to be used.
This will protect the surface of the table and the case of
computer during disassembly.

.ti -.5i
3.	Unplug the power cord and disconnect all other cables attached
to the computer.

.ti -.5i
4.	Remove the screen cover and set it aside.  

.ti -.5i
5.	Pull the keyboard out and place it on the right-hand side of
the 4P.  Move it as far away as the cable will allow.

.ti -.5i
6.	Place the 4P face-down on the table so that the handle is on top.

.ti -.5i
7.	Remove the four white screws (two on either side) of the case.
These are painted screws, so be sure to use the proper-sized screwdriver
to avoid scraping the paint.


.in 0i
.ce
Page  1
.bp
.sp .5i
.in .5i

.ti -.5i
8.	Lift the handle and completely loosen (but don't remove) the two
screws that are located under the handle.  This is somewhat awkward to do,
but can be accomplished
by tilting the handle so that each screw can be accessed easier.  When
both screws are loose, remove the handle.  The screws will stay in
the handle-assembly unless you remove them.

.ti -.5i
9.	Open the cable access door, and remove the computer housing 
by reaching under the edge of the cable access door, and lifting the
plastic housing with your fingers while pressing down on
the black metal plate with your thumb.  If the cover sticks, it may be
the warranty seal that is holding things down.  Cut the seal and try again.
Once the housing is loose, lift it off the computer and set it aside.
\fBNever\fR lift the computer off the table and shake it to loosen the housing.
If the computer drops suddenly, it could break the CRT.

.ti -.5i
10.	Set the computer on its side, so that the screen is facing to
your right and the floppy drives are on top.

.ti -.5i
11.	Remove the two unpainted \fBPhillips\fR screws located between the
fan and the rear plate.  (This area is behind the floppy drives, and
may be partially hidden by the cables for the floppy drives.)
The screws are holding a gold-colored bracket in place.  Do not remove
the other screws in this area.
Be careful not to drop the screws into the fan opening.

.ti -.5i
12.	Now lay the computer upside-down with the rear facing you. 
Remove the two unpainted Phillips screws on the left end of the gold-colored
bracket.  Remove the bracket and set it aside.

.ti -.5i
13.	Along the sides of the case are eight screws, four on each side.
Remove three from each side, and loosen but do not remove the
two screws (one on each side) at the front.   One of the screws you remove
probably has a grounding cable attached to it.  This screw may be longer
than the others, so remember where it came from. 

\fBNote:\fR On the floppy drive side of the case there is an additional
screw holding
a bracket in place.  This is located near the connector for the keyboard
cable.  You do not need to remove this screw.
   
.ti -.5i
14.	Remove the three black screws along the top edge of the rear of
the chassis.  These are located on either side of the data connectors.

.ti -.5i
15.	Gently pull the rear metal plate (painted black) away and lift the
CPU pan (the surface currently facing up) so that the edge connectors are
sticking out above the back plate.  

.ti -.5i
16.	Set the computer on its side so that the screen faces away from you
and the floppy drives are on top.  Remove the ribbon cable from the floppy
drives (not at the CPU board) so that the CPU pan can swing open wider.

.ti -.5i
17.	Swing open the CPU pan about six inches. 
Avoid opening the CPU pan wider than this, as it can cause some hard-to-reach
cables to become disconnected.

.ti -.5i
18.	Locate the existing boot ROM or EPROM.  Two different types of CPU
boards were built for the Model 4P, but the boot ROM is in the same place.
Look for a 24 pin part labeled U70 or U69, located roughly in the center
of the board. 

.ti -.5i
19.	If the ROM has small wires jumpered to it, don't worry.  Your
computer is an early model and the wires are not needed once the new
part is installed.  Although there may be two or three wires, only one
connects to the CPU board.  Cut that wire in half and place some tape
over the end so that it does not make contact with anything.  The other
wires do not require any action.

.ti -.5i
20.	On one end of the ROM, there will be a notch, indentation or small
"divot".  This indicates which end of the chip has pin 1.  It is
extremely important to remember which way the chip goes in so that
the new boot ROM can be installed correctly.   Although the CPU board
may also have a "1" marked on it indicating where pin 1 is, CPU
boards have been known to be incorrectly marked.  









.in 0i
.ce
Page  2
.bp
.sp .5i
.in .5i


.ti -.5i
21.	Remove the old ROM from the socket.
If you know how to remove the part, do so and skip to Step 22.   

If you don't know how to remove the chip, here is one way to do it
with the tools you have.   Using the blade of a flat-blade 
screwdriver, slip the end between the chip and the socket on either
end of the chip.  (DO NOT try to do this between the pins on a
side.)  Insert the
screwdriver only a quarter of an inch, or less.  Now rotate the
screwdriver VERY GENTLY so that the chip lifts away from the socket.
If you can't do this, then use the screwdriver as a lever and pry
the chip up NO MORE than 1/8 of an inch.  DO NOT try to pry the chip
out of its socket with a single motion or you could bend or break
the pins, or even crack the chip.

Now that you have one end of the chip lifted slightly, insert
the screwdriver further under the chip (about 3/4 of an inch, or
as far as it will go without forcing), and repeat the process.
This will lift the chip out of its socket without bending the pins.
You may have to insert and turn the screwdriver one more time to completely
lift the chip.

If the chip has not fallen out, you should be able to grasp it on
each end with a finger and pull it straight out.  If it is too tight
to be removed using two fingers, repeat the screwdriver maneuver.

.ti -.5i
22.	Remove the new boot ROM from the foam or tube.  If the chip
was packaged in foam, check between the pins for any small pieces
of the foam that may have stuck to the pins or to the chip.
Remove these particles.

.ti -.5i
23.	Insert the old boot ROM into the foam or the tube.  This will
protect the part from static electricity.

.ti -.5i
24.	Insert the new boot ROM into the socket that the 
old part came from.  Make
sure the notch, indention or "divot" on the chip is facing the
same way as the part you removed.   This is most important, as 
improper insertion will ruin the boot ROM.

Line the chip up so that its legs are sitting in the sockets.
You may have to bend one or more pins ever so slightly to get them
all started into the socket.   When everything appears to be
lined up, press the chip into the socket part-way by pressing it
with your thumb.  Confirm that all the pins are still going into
the socket and that none are going outside the socket or are
bending under the chip.  (The top of a pin usually bows out
if the bottom of the pin is bending under the chip.)  A flashlight
or desk lamp is useful in checking this.  If one
or more pins are out of line, remove the ROM using the
screwdriver method, and straighten the pins out that are not
inserting properly.  Then try again.  It may take a few tries
to get all the pins going into the socket.

If the pins are still going into the socket after you have pushed
it halfway into place, push it down until it feels firmly seated.
There is usually about 1/8 to 1/16 of an inch between the bottom
of the chip and the socket when it is inserted properly.

Do not try to force the chip flush with the socket.  Some sockets
are designed to prevent you from doing this and the excessive
force could crack the CPU board.

Now run your finger along the pins on either side.  If a pin feels like
it is out of line, examine it carefully, as it may have folded under
the chip despite your efforts.  If you have a flashlight, examine
the pins by looking under the chip from one end.  If a leg is bent,
carefully remove the chip and straighten the leg by bending it very slowly
and try
again.  A chip leg can usually be straightened twice without breaking, 
but that is all.

.ti -.5i
25.	Close the CPU pan into its normal operating position
and push the ribbon cable for the floppy drives back through the
hole it goes through.


.ti -.5i
26.	Plug the floppy cable back into the two drives and make sure it and
the other wires in the area are not touching the fan.

.ti -.5i
27.	Install and tighten the three black screws in the back cover.





.in 0i
.ce
Page  3
.bp
.sp .5i
.in .5i
.ti -.5i
Before the computer is assembled further, test the installation
by following these steps.

.ti -.5i
28.	Turn the computer around so you can see the screen, but keep it
on end, with the floppy drives on top.  Make sure there are no floppies
in the disk drives.

.ti -.5i
29.	Plug the power cable into the jack on the back of the computer 
and into a wall outlet.

.ti -.5i
30.	Turn the computer on.  After a few seconds, the light on floppy
drive 0 should come on and stay on for a few seconds.  Then the light
should go out and the message \fLThe floppy disk drive is not ready\fR
should appear on the screen.  If this didn't happen to you, read the
following items and take the corrective action that is suggested.

.in 1.0i
.ti -.5i
A.	If no message appeared on the screen, adjust the brightness
and contrast to the maximum settings.  If you see random characters
on the screen, unplug the computer immediately.  The ROM is probably not
installed correctly.  Remove the three screws from the back, open
the CPU pan and check the ROM for improper insertion or bent pins.

.ti -.5i
B.	If the screen has a raster (the pattern of lines) but no
text, then the cable to the power supply or video section got disconnected
when the CPU pan was open.  This can happen when the pan is opened too wide.
Turn the power off and see the instructions for "Loose Video/Power/Reset
Cables".

.ti -.5i
C.	If the light on drive 1 came on instead of drive 0, the cable
going to the floppy drives is wired improperly.  Unplug the power and
plug the ribbon connector that was plugged into drive 1 into drive 0
and vice versa.  Re-run the test.

.ti -.5i
D.	If both floppy drive lights came on and stayed on, the ribbon
cable is plugged into the two drives upside down.  Unplug the
power cable and correct the cabling.  Then run this test again.

.ti -.5i
E.	If the neither drive light came on, and the message said
"The floppy disk drive is not available", the ribbon cable
to the floppy drives (or their power cables) is not connected.  Turn
the power off, check this out and try again.

.in .5i
.ti -.5i
31.	If that worked correctly, press the RESET button and then
press F1 within three seconds.  After a moment, you should see the
message \fLThe hard disk drive is not available\fR.  Again, if this didn't
work right, check the following items.

.in 1.0i
.ti -.5i
F.	If nothing happened when you pressed RESET (the screen did not
clear), the reset cable has probably come loose from the CPU board and must
be reattached.  See the instructions for "Loose Video/Power/Reset Cables".

.ti -.5i
G.	If instead of an error message about the hard disk drive, you got an
error message about the \fIfloppy\fR drive, the keyboard cable is
probably loose.  Unplug the power cord and reseat the cable from the
keyboard firmly
into its connector.  This can be done without opening the CPU pan by
using the side of a flathead screwdriver.





















.in 0i
.ce
Page  4
.bp
.sp .5i
.in .5i

.in 0i
If the above tests worked correctly, unplug the power cord
from the wall and the computer and proceed with the reassembly instructions.

.in .5i
.ti -.5i
32.	Turn the computer around so the front is away from you.
Reinstall the gold-colored bracket by installing the screws
next to the fan first and then install the screws on the other end.
These four screws hold the computer to the carrying-handle, so make sure
they are tight.

.ti -.5i
33.	Place the computer with the screen facing down, with the
keyboard on the left and the excess keyboard cable laying 
against the CPU pan.

.ti -.5i
34.	Install and tighten all eight screws (four per side) that are on
the sides of the CPU pan.  Remember to tighten the two at the front and
to reattach the grounding strap (if it was present.)

.ti -.5i
35.	Place the plastic housing over the chassis.  Make sure the housing is
oriented so that the data connectors are visible through the access
door.  Check the four holes that hold the white screws to ensure
that the case is lined-up properly.

.ti -.5i
36.	Install the handle so that the writing will be face-up when the
computer is in its up-right position.  Carefully tighten the two
screws that hold the handle in place.  Make sure these do not
get cross-threaded, and make sure they are tight.

.ti -.5i
37.	Install the four white screws.  

.in 0i
This completes the installation procedure.


\s+2Loose Video/Power/Reset Cables\s-2


Near the front of the CPU pan are three rust-colored connectors that
connect the CPU to the reset switch, video monitor, and the power supply.
When the CPU pan is open, it is possible for one or more of these connectors
to become disconnected.

Depending on how much slack is available, you may be able to reach the loose
connector with your fingers or with needle-nose pliers, and reseat it on the
appropriate connector.

If you are unable to do this, remove the last two screws that hold the CPU
pan in place.  Once this is done, get all three connectors firmly back in
position, then close the pan and reinstall four or more screws.  Once you
think you have the pan back in operating position, go back and repeat
the tests that start at Step 28.


























.in 0i
.ce
Page  5
.bp
.sp .5i
\s+2License Agreement and Warranty\s-2

The 4P-ROM firmware and this documentation are copyrighted with all
rights reserved.  The user is granted a license to use the ROM or
EPROM (hereafter called ROM) which contains the 4P-ROM firmware
on a single Model 4P computer system.

This product contains serial numbers and other traceable markings.
The user of this product may not duplicate the ROM for any purpose.

Companies or individuals with multiple systems must obtain multiple copies
of the firmware.    

M. A. D. Software warrants the ROM which contains the 4P-ROM firmware
to be free from defects under normal use for a period of 90 days from the
date of original purchase.  If during this 90 day period a defect in the ROM
makes the firmware unusable, you may return it to M. A. D. Software for
replacement without charge.   The user does pay the cost of delivering
the ROM to M. A. D. Software.


This warranty does not cover damage to the ROM (or the firmware within)
caused by improper handling, bent or broken pins, improper insertion
(including backwards insertion) or damage caused by any malfunction in
the computer system.   It also does not cover damage caused by fire,
flood or other acts of God.

M.A.D. Software makes no commitment to provide any upgrade.  However, if
one is produced, the following upgrade policy will apply:

.in .5i
If an upgrade ROM becomes available during the 90 day warranty period,
the user will be advised to return the ROM to M. A. D. Software 
for replacement without charge.

After 90 days, any upgrade ROM that is made available will be provided
at a nominal charge when the user returns the original, working
ROM.

.in 0i
Any ROM that is returned due to a defect for an in-warranty exchange or
for an upgrade (in or out of warranty) that has a defaced or invalid
registration number will not be accepted.

Except as provided for above, M. A. D. Software and the author make no
warranties, either expressed or implied, with respect to this firmware
or its fitness for any purpose.  This firmware is provided "as-is".  Although
significant testing has been performed to insure that this product will
work with the systems listed, this firmware cannot be expected to work
in systems other than those listed and on versions of operating systems
other than the ones specified.  Non-standard versions of 
software, hardware or firmware can also prevent this product from
functioning as intended.  Should the firmware provided prove defective or
incompatible,
the buyer assumes the entire cost of all necessary servicing, repair, or
correction and any incidental or consequential damages.  M. A. D. Software
and the author 
assume no liability for direct, indirect, incidental or
consequential damages resulting from any use of or any defects in the
firmware.


\s+2For Your Records:


ROM Model #	|


ROM Serial #		|



Date Purchased:   ___________________________________________



Model 4P Serial # _________________________________________\s-2







.ce
Page  6
.bp
.sp .5i


\s+2Operation\s-2

The 4P-ROM commands are the same as those available on the original
4P boot ROM, plus a few new options.

When RESET is pressed, the keyboard is monitored for about three
seconds.  If no keys are pressed, the 4P-ROM will attempt to boot the
system using these devices in this order:

.in .5i
1.	Attempt to boot over a Network 4 network. (Diskless)
.br
2.	Attempt to boot from a hard disk drive.
.br
3.	Attempt to boot from a floppy disk drive.
.br
4.	Attempt to boot using Model III image in RAM.
.br

.in 0i
When all four attempts have been made, an error message will be displayed.
The following keys may be pressed to override the normal
boot sequence.  (Unlike the Model 4/4D, you do not have to hold the key
down, just press it.)

.in 1.5i
.ti -1.5i
.bx F1
\ or
.bx 1
		Load the operating system from the hard disk drive only.

.ti -1.5i
.bx F2
\ or
.bx 2
		Load the operating system from the floppy disk drive only.

.ti -1.5i
.bx F3
\ or
.bx 3
		Load the operating system from the floppy disk drive and
configure the computer for Model III mode.  This is done
by loading the file MODEL%/III into low memory and
write-protecting that memory.  Once done, the Model 4P
looks like a Model III.

The MODEL%/III file may be loaded
from a LDOS 5.x, TRSDOS 6.x, or LS-DOS 6.x format diskette,
single or double-sided.  The file may also be loaded from a
TRSDOS 1.3 format diskette.

.ti -1.5i
.bx P
		        Prompts you when the Model III ROM-image has been loaded
into RAM.  This gives you the chance to swap disks
before attempting to boot a Model III operating system.
This ie meant for use when booting a Model III operating system other
than LS-DOS, LDOS or TRSDOS.  This is also used with the self-booting
game disks that run in Model III mode.
(If you want to run Model III ROM BASIC, use
.bx F3
\ and
.bx P
\ to load the Model III ROM-image.  Then at the prompt, press 
.bx BREAK
\&.)
.br
(This option has no effect on network, hard disk and
Model 4 mode booting.)

.ti -1.5i
.bx L
		        Forces the 4P-ROM to load the Model III ROM-image even
though the diskette in drive 0 does not appear to need a
Model III mode environment.

.ti -1.5i
.bx N
		        Forces the 4P-ROM to \fInot\fR load the Model III
ROM-image even though the diskette in drive 0 appears
to be a Model III mode operating system that would need
the ROM-image.  

.ti -1.5i
.bx O
		        Tells the 4P-ROM to not boot from an attached
Network 4 network.  If the hardware is not present, this
command is not needed, but if the hardware is present and you want to boot your
system from a floppy or hard disk drive, this
command will prevent the 4P from booting over the network.

.ti -1.5i
.bx RIGHT-SHIFT
	    This option allows diagnostics and other programs to be loaded
into the Model 4P via the RS-232 port.  This is used
by Radio Shack technicians and has been maintained
for compatibility reasons.

.ti -1.5i
.bx V
		       Causes the 4P-ROM to display its version code.  If
your 4P-ROM is customized, your message will also be
displayed.

.ti -1.5i
.bx A
.bx B
.bx C
.bx D
.bx E
.bx F
\ or
.bx G
     Specifies which MODEL%/III file is to be loaded.
By default, the first one found in the directory (non-alphabetic search)
is used.  To date, only three
MODEL%/III files have been produced:
.br
.in 2.0i
MODELA/III	American keyboard driver
.br
MODELD/III	German keyboard driver
.br
MODELF/III	French keyboard driver
.br



.in 0i
.ce
Page  7
.bp
.sp .5i

.in 1.5i
.ti -1.5i
.bx ENTER
		\|Tells the 4P-ROM to boot now, rather than waiting the
full three seconds.  This can be used by itself or after
any of the other keys.  This is known as the "hurry-up"
key.  If you pressed
.bx ENTER
\ as part of a command that
rebooted the system, you must release it before rebooting
commences.  You may then press
.bx ENTER
\ again to speed things up.

.ti -1.5i
.bx \.
		        Run the diagnostics that are available in the 4P-ROM.
Unlike the other keys, this key must be held down while
RESET is being pressed.


.in 0i
When diagnostics are invoked, you can either run a 64K memory test
(the original ROM only tested the upper 48K), display a series of
video alignment patterns for 64 x 16 and 80 x 24, or exercise any
floppy disk drive.

The memory test runs until errors are encountered.
It displays the number of solid and intermittent failures it detected,
and more importantly, which bit rows were failing.  This can be translated
directly into a specific RAM chip.  The memory test does require that
the video RAM (a separate part) be working properly.

The video test offers one test display after another until RESET is
pressed.  To advance to the next display, press the 
.bx SPACE
\ key.  The first 64K of memory does not have to be present for this test
to work.

The disk drive test prompts for a drive number (0, 1, 2 or 3) and
exercises that drive until RESET is pressed.  The test expects a
LDOS 5, TRSDOS 6 or LS-DOS 6 format floppy to be in the drive.
The heads are positioned and one sector is read.  Then the heads are
moved to another track and a different sector is read.  A series of
incremental and variable travel tests are performed.  No retries are
performed on the sector reads and any errors detected are reported.
This test only uses side 0 of the floppy drive under test and requires
that the first 64K of memory be working.


Incompatibilities

To prevent the 4P-ROM from attempting to boot from a hard disk that
does not have a proper boot track, a hard disk will not be booted from
unless the last byte (0xff) of the boot sector contains the value (0xfd).
This means that you do not have to press the 
.bx F2
\ key to get a system with a hard disk to boot from a floppy properly.
Hard disk boot modifications from vendors other than M. A. D. Software
will probably have to be modified to allow hard disk booting.

Some of the internal functions documented in the \fIModel 4P Technical
Reference\fR
have changed their entry parameters.  This was done to accomodate
SCSI-based hard disks and other features of the 4P-ROM.  These are rarely
used (since they are only available while the system is booting),
so this should not
cause any difficulty.   If you need details of these changes, please
contact M. A. D. Software.



007022





















.in 0i
.ce
Page  8
.br

