\"Updated 17-Aug-88
.lg 0
.de en
\fB\s-2\(br\|\\$1\|\(br\l'|0\(rn'\l'|0\(ul'\s+2\fR\c
..
.sp .5i
.ps 16p
.vs 18p
.ce
ENHANCED ROM FOR MODEL 4/4D
.ps 12p
.vs 13p
.ce
Copyright 1985, 1989 fdiv, All Rights Reserved.
.br
.ce
Licensed to M. A. D. Software
.br
.ps 10p
.vs 11p


Congratulations on purchasing the "X" or "XD" ROM for the Model 4/4D.
These products provide numerous
enhancements to the capabilities and performance of your machine.
.br
.sp
.in 1.0i
.ti -1.0i
\fB\s+2Important\s-2\fR:	Read the license agreement and warranty terms before opening the
ROM package.  If you have obtained the wrong product or
you cannot agree to the license and warranty terms, return
the entire package (including documentation) with the ROM package still sealed for
an exchange or full refund.  The product must be returned within 30 days.
Once the ROM package is opened, only exchanges for identical
parts will be made.
.br	
.sp
.in 0i
Please read over the instructions carefully before using your part.  They
will warn you of things to watch for during the disassembly and reassembly
of your computer, and will also tell you how to take advantage of the
new functions.
.br
.sp
Some of the features that the "X" ROM provides include:
.br
.sp
.in 1.0i
.ti -.5i
\(bu	Ability to boot LS-DOS\u\(rg\d 6.3 or TRSDOS\u\(rg\d 6.2 directly from
a hard disk drive without using a startup diskette.
(You must use the HBUILD6 utility to install a new
boot track on your LS-DOS 6.3 or TRSDOS 6.2 hard disk.
The ability to boot LDOS\u\(rg\d 5.3 in a similar fashion
is being researched at this time.)

.ti -.5i
\(bu	When running in Model III mode, the ROM driver 
allows the keyboard to produce all 128 ASCII
character codes.   The keyboard repeat rate and other
parameters can also be adjusted.

.ti -.5i
\(bu	When running in Model III mode at 4MHZ, the real-time
clock continues to keep correct time and the cursor
blink remains constant.

.ti -.5i
\(bu	With Network III or Network 4 hardware installed,
either can be booted by pressing a single key.

.ti -.5i
\(bu	Allows the use of a fully programmable CRT Controller (6845)
in place of the preprogrammed version (68045) that came installed
with the Model 4. 
.in 0i

\s+2How It Works\s-2

The Model III, 4 and 4D contain two or three code ROMs.  These allow the machine
to provide BASIC\u\(rg\d when the machine does not have a disk drive.  When running
a Model III disk operating system (LDOS, TRSDOS 1.x, etc), the
ROM continues to provide many needed services to both the DOS and to
programs that you run.  For example, Disk BASIC only adds functions
to the existing ROM BASIC.

The code in the Model 4 and 4D version of these ROMs varies slightly from
what was in the Model III.  (These changes deal with initializing the
Model 4/4D hardware and supporting the extra keys on the keyboard.)

The three ROMs are named the "A", "B" and "C" ROMs.  The "A" ROM contains
8192 bytes of code that consist of machine-independent operations and some
of BASIC.   The "B" ROM is 4096 bytes long and contains the rest of ROM
BASIC.  The "C" ROM is 2048 bytes long and contains code that controls
functions that change depending on where the machine is to be sold.
For instance, if the Model 4 has a German keyboard, the keyboard driver has
to be different.  The keyboard driver is stored in the "C" ROM, so only a single
code ROM has to be replaced.

The Model 4D only has two physical ROMs.  Two 8192 byte ROMs are used.
The first ROM is called the "A" ROM and is identical to the one "A" ROM used
in the Model 4.  The second ROM is called the "D" ROM.  It contains the
code that was in both the "B" and "C" ROMs in a Model 4.  An additional
2K of code in the "D" ROM is used during the manufacturing burn-in
process and cannot normally be accessed.

The "X" ROM replaces the "C" ROM used in the Model 4, while the "XD" ROM
replaces the "D" ROM used in the Model 4D.

.fi

.ce
Page  1
.bp
.sp .5i

\s+2What you should know before starting the installation\s-2

Installing the "X" or "XD" ROM requires that you disassemble your computer.
When you do this, the "warranty seal" will be broken.  The strictest reading
of the Radio Shack repair policy is that any remaining warranty (original
or a repair warranty) will be void if the seal is broken, and if the machine
is ever repaired again by Radio Shack, the technicians may remove or replace
any "alien" components to restore the unit to its original state.

However, in 1982 Ed Juge (the Press Officer of Radio Shack/Tandy)
clarified how "alien" modifications are handled by
Radio Shack Service Centers.  In "TRS-80 Microcomputer News", July/August
1982, and in "80-US", May 1982, Mr. Juge states that Radio Shack will
service a machine with a modification and will ignore it if doesn't seem
to be hurting anything.  If the modification prevents the technician
from properly testing the unit, they may ask you for permission to remove
it. 

It is also possible
that some future repair may require the CPU board be exchanged and the
technician may not notice that you have a different ROM in your
machine and may fail to move the "X" or "XD" ROM to the replacement
board.  To avoid this, be sure to tell the technician that you have a
special ROM in the "C" (Model 4) or "D" (Model 4D) position.  Be sure this
gets written down on the repair ticket in case a different person ends up
working on your machine.   You should leave the sticker on your "X" or "XD"
ROM, as this will help identify it as a special part.

You should also keep your old "C" or "D" part so that you can either replace
it in your Model 4 or 4D before taking your machine in for repair, or have
it available if the technician wants to use it in place of the "X" or "XD"
part while repairing the machine.

This information is not meant to alarm you.  It just advises you of
things you should be aware of if your machine ever requires service in
the future.   Since the "X" or "XD" ROM is compatible with the old
"C" and "D" ROM, most of the diagnostics a technician might run will produce identical
results.   Generally, the repair centers are very cooperative.


\s+2Installation\s-2

As discussed above, installing the "X" or "XD" ROM requires your computer
to be disassembled.  The entire job can be done in about 30 minutes.  Two
steps are much easier if you have a second person to help.  Read through the
following steps and if the procedure seems beyond your capabilities, seek
help from a local computer shop, TV repair store or local college.

The installation instructions are written for the person who has never
disassembled a Model 4 or 4D before, but is able to perform repairs
on the car or the toaster.   If you have installed a battery-powered
clock in your computer or changed a disk drive, the instructions need
only be skimmed.  Otherwise, read each step entirely and then perform
the action.  It is suggested that you place a check mark next to
each step as it is completed so that you won't skip anything.

The following procedure installs the "X" ROM in a Model 4 or a "XD" ROM
in a Model 4D.  If you do not know which machine you have,
the Model 4D can be identified by looking at the back of the machine.
If it is a Model 4D, there will be a RS-232 connector (a 25 pin connector)
on the back of the machine.  If there is no connector, the unit is a
Model 4.  Make sure
you have obtained the correct part ("X" or "XD") before going any further.

\s+2Installing the "X" ROM in the Model 4 or the "XD" ROM in the Model 4D\s-2

.in .5i
.ti -.5i
1.	You will need a medium-sized Phillips screwdriver, a small
flat-blade screwdriver (1/4" wide tip or smaller), a large
towel (or towels) that will cover a 5' x 3' area, and a
table or workbench with at least 5' x 3' of space.

.ti -.5i
2.	Place the cloth or towel over the area that is to be used.
This will protect the surface of the table and the case of
computer during disassembly.

.ti -.5i
3.	Unplug the power cord and disconnect all other cables attached
to the computer.

.ti -.5i
4.	Place the Model 4 on the left hand side of the table
and lay it on its left side, as one looks at the keyboard.




.in 0
.ce
Page  2
.in .5i
.bp
.sp .5i
.ti -.5i
5.	Remove the ten Phillips screws that hold the top and bottom
of the case together.   Keep track of where the screws come from as
they may be of different types and sizes.  In some cases, one or more
screws may be missing or may be hidden under the warranty seal.  Two
recessed screws on either side of the case are sometimes hard to
remove.  If you don't have a magnetized screwdriver, simply unscrew
them until they are loose.  They should fall out in the next step.

.ti -.5i
6.	Set the machine upright by tipping it from its side.  It
should now be on the right side of the table.  While tilting 
the machine, keep in mind that the cover is loose, so hold the
top and bottom sections together.
If you had trouble with the two side screws, check to see that
they have fallen out onto the table.  If they did not, go back
to Step 4.

.ti -.5i
7.	Remove the Phillips screw from the back of the cabinet.  If it is missing, don't worry; it is
possible that this part was left out after some previous
disassembly.

.ti -.5i
8.	If you have floppy drives with "garage door" latches (these came
standard on the Model 4 but not on the Model 4D), close them before
proceeding.

.ti -.5i
9.	READ STEP 9 ENTIRELY BEFORE DOING STEP 9.

Very carefully, lift the top half of the case STRAIGHT UP.
Watch the neck of the CRT through the vent at the top of the
computer, or through the top floppy drive opening.  It is VERY
IMPORTANT that you not lift the cover at an angle or push the
cover towards the back because the CRT socket or cabling could
catch on the lower half of the chassis and break the tube.  If you
have a second person to help, have them watch the CRT neck and
give directions as you lift.  Do not allow the top half of
the computer to slip or drop, as the CRT could implode.

Once the cover is clear of the lower half of the computer, lay
the cover on its side next to the bottom half.  The cables from
the bottom half to the cover are long enough to do this.
The cover should be sitting on the left side of the computer now, as
one looks at the keyboard.

.ti -.5i
10.	Move around to the back of the computer.  If a metal plate covers
the circuit boards (across the back), remove the brass-colored screws
that hold the cover in place.  These are located across the top
and sides of the CPU enclosure.  Do not remove the screws that
hold the CPU to the plastic base.  If there is no shield, skip
to step 13.

.ti -.5i
11.	Some machines are equipped with Network 4 or a Model III graphics
hardware.  These boards (only one can be present in a machine)
are mounted on the shield.  If these boards are present, one or
more multi-wire cables will plug into connectors that stick
out of a slot in the shield.  Make a note of where each connector
goes (label them if necessary) and unplug them from the connector(s)
on the shield.

.ti -.5i
12.	Once the screws are removed, gently fold the shield (metal surface
that faces the back of the machine) down.  In some machines, 
small metal hooks were installed to hold the cover in place while the
screws are being inserted.  By bending the cover back in one area at a
time, the cover should fold down so that the CPU board is revealed.

Some units also have a metal foil across the bottom of the shield.
If this prevents the shield from folding down, peel it off the
shield but leave it attached to the base of the machine.  You will
have to re-apply the foil later, so don't destroy it.

.ti -.5i
13.	You should now be able to see the CPU board.  If you own a
Model 4D, skip to Step 15.  If you own a Model 4, go to Step 14.

.ti -.5i
\fBThis step is for the Model 4 Only\fR

.ti -.5i
14.	At the bottom of
the circuit board, just to the left of center are the three ROMs used
in the Model 4.  These are 24 pin parts.  Near each socket (usually
just above it) is written a number like U70.  U70 is where the CROM
is located and this is the part we will change.   

If you cannot find U70, or the socket with that number is the wrong
size, don't panic.   There were several different circuit boards
built for the Model 4, and the one you have may have the socket
in a slightly different place or it may have a different
socket number.






.in 0
.ce
Page  3
.in .5i
.bp
.sp .5i
Search the CPU board for the following items and you should be
able to identify the "C" ROM:

.in 1i
.ti -.5i
1.	The chip must have 24 pins.

.ti -.5i
2.	There should be two other 24 pin chips adjacent
(in the same row) to the chip you located.

.ti -.5i
3.	The part number on the chip ends in "16".  For
example, MCM68A316, 8042316, 2716, 2516, etc.

.in .5i
Once you locate a chip that meets these requirements, you have
located the correct part.  The "A" and "B" ROMs have part
numbers that end in "64" and "32", so it should be pretty easy
to identify the "C" ROM.   Now, skip over the Model 4D-only
instructions and go to Step 16.


.in 1i
.ti -.5i
Note:	There is another 24 pin part that has been mistaken for
the CROM because it has a number stamped on it that
ends in "16".  It usually also has the part number 8049007
and is not located near any other 24 pin parts.  This part
is NOT the CROM.   Be sure that all three "rules" listed
above are met.
.in .5i	

Now skip over the Model 4D-only instructions by going to Step 16.


.ti -.5i
\fBThis step is for the Model 4D Only\fR

.ti -.5i
15.	Near the upper left corner of the Model 4D CPU board are the
two ROMs, one above the other.  These are 24 pin parts.  The
upper part is the DROM, the part to be replaced.  Just above
it should be the label "U4".


.ti -.5i
\fBModel 4 and 4D \fR

.ti -.5i
16.	On one end of the ROM there will be a notch, indentation or small
"divot".  This indicates which end of the ROM has pin 1.  It is
extremely important to remember which way the ROM goes in so that
the new ROM can be installed correctly.   Although the CPU board
may also have a "1" marked on it indicating where pin 1 is, CPU
boards have been known to be incorrectly marked.  

.ti -.5i
17.	Remove the "C" or "D" ROM from the socket.  If you know how remove the ROM,
do so and skip to 18.   

If you don't know how to remove the IC, here is one way to do it
with the tools you have.   Using the blade of the flat-blade 
screwdriver, slip the end between the IC and the socket on either
end of the chip.  DO NOT try to do this between the pins.  Insert the
screwdriver only a quarter of an inch, or less.  Now rotate the
screwdriver VERY GENTLY so that the chip lifts away from the socket.
If you can't so this, then use the screwdriver as a lever and pry
the chip up NO MORE than 1/8 of an inch.  DO NOT try to pry the chip
out of its socket with a single motion or you could bend or break
the pins, or even crack the chip.

Now that you have one end of the chip lifted slightly, insert
the screwdriver further under the chip (about 3/4 of an inch, or
as far as it will go without forcing), and repeat the process.
This will lift the chip out of its socket without bending the pins.
You may have to insert the screwdriver one more time to completely
lift the chip.

If the chip has not fallen out, you should be able to grasp it on
each end with a finger and pull it straight out.  If it is too tight
to be removed using two fingers, repeat the screwdriver maneuver.

.ti -.5i
18.	Remove the "X" or "XD" ROM from the foam or tube.  If the chip
was packaged in foam, check between the pins for any small pieces
of the foam that may have stuck to the pins or to the chip.
Remove these particles.

.ti -.5i
19.	Insert the old "C" or "D" ROM pins into the foam or the tube.  This will
protect the part from static electricity.

.ti -.5i
20.	Insert the "X" or "XD" ROM into the socket that the "C" 
or "D" ROM came from.  Make
sure the notch, indention or "divot" on the chip is facing the
same way as the "C" or "D" ROM.   This is most important, as 
improper insertion will ruin the ROM and void the warranty.


.in 0
.ce
Page  4
.in .5i
.bp
.sp .5i

Line the chip up so that its legs are sitting in the sockets.
You may have to bend one or more pins ever so slightly to get them
all started into the socket.   When everything appears to be
lined up, press the chip into the socket part-way by pressing it
with your thumb.  Confirm that all the pins are still going into
the socket and that none are going outside the socket or are
bending under the chip.  (The top of the pin usually bows out
if the bottom of the pin is bending under the chip.)  If one
or more pins are out of line, remove chip using the
screwdriver method, and straighten the pins out that are not
inserting properly.  Then try again.  It may take a few tries
to get all the pins going into the socket.

If the pins are still going into the socket after you have pushed
it halfway into place, push it down until it feels firmly seated.
There is usually about 1/8 to 1/16 of an inch between the bottom
of the chip and the socket when it is inserted properly.

Do not try to force the chip flush with the socket.  Some sockets
are designed to prevent you from doing this and the excessive
force could crack the CPU board.

Now run your finger along the pins on either side.  If a pin feels like
it is out of line, examine it carefully, as it may have folded under
the chip despite your efforts.  If you have a flashlight, examine
the pins by looking under the chip from one end.  If a leg is bent,
carefully remove the chip and straighten the leg by bending it very slowly and try
again.  A IC leg can usually be straightened twice without breaking, 
but that is all.

.ti -.5i
21.	In the upper half of the case, check the connector that attaches
to the video board (mounted on the side of the cover).  Sometimes
this comes loose when the machine is disassembled.  Make sure
the connector is pushed all the way onto the circuit board.  

.ti -.5i
22.	Re-install the shield over the CPU board if your machine had one.
If there was a piece of foil-covered tape along the bottom of the
shield, be sure the foil is on the outside of the shield when
you put it back in place.   Press the tape into place and if the
adhesive is not holding the tape in place, use non-fiber packing
tape or electricians tape to hold it in position.

Once the shield is back in position, insert and tighten the
brass screws that hold the shield in place.

If your machine has the Network 4 or Model III graphics boards,
reconnect the cables that you removed earlier.   If you have
the Model III graphics board and fail to reconnect these cables
correctly, the screen will not display anything when you test the
installation.

.ti -.5i
23.	At this point, you can either completely reassemble the machine,
or test the ROM first.   If you want to go ahead and reassemble
the machine, Skip to step 33.



.ti -.5i
\s+2Testing the "X" or "XD" ROM installation with the machine disassembled\s-2

.in 1.5i
.ti -1.0i
\fBCAUTION!	HIGH VOLTAGE EXISTS WITHIN THE CABINET WHEN
POWER IS APPLIED, EVEN WHEN THE POWER SWITCH
IS OFF.  AVOID TOUCHING ALL METAL SURFACES.  NEVER TOUCH ANY
OF THE CIRCUITS WHILE POWER
IS APPLIED TO THE COMPUTER.\fR
.in .5i

.ti -.5i
24.	Reach under the right edge of the machine and turn the power switch
on.  Because the 120 volt connections to that switch are exposed
while the cover is removed, that area should be avoided during
this test.   For this test, the computer will be turned on and
off by plugging it into the outlet or an extension cord.

.ti -.5i
25.	Plug the power cable into the outlet.  The floppy drive should
light and the floppy drive motor should run for a few seconds
and then stop.  If 'Yes', go to Step 28.

.ti -.5i
26.	Press RESET.  The floppy drive should light and the motor should
run for a few seconds and then stop.  If 'Yes', go to Step 28.








.in 0
.ce
Page  5
