


                      Questions and Answers
                                                                004161

We receive queries about our products from time to time and there
are some commonly-asked questions.  This document discusses these
issues so that you can be better-informed on the capabilities and
limitations  of  our products, and be able to determine which are
right for you.

Q:      How does HBUILD6 work?


A:      HBUILD6 replaces the boot track on logical drive 0 (which
     must  be  on head 0 on the primary hard disk drive) with one
     that contains code capable of booting  from  the  hard  disk
     drive.   When  the  operating system was originally moved to
     the hard disk  from  the  distribution  floppy,  the  BACKUP
     utility  simply  copied  the boot track that is used to boot
     from a floppy drive, and placed it on the hard disk.   Model
     4P  owners have to hold down the F2 key when booting so that
     the system will not try to  use  the  boot-from-floppy  boot
     track that was deposited on the hard disk drive.

Q:      Is HBUILD6 all I need to boot from the hard disk?

A:      It depends on what type of system you have.  The Model 4P
     boot  ROM  was  designed  with  hard disk boot-capability in
     mind.  If you have a Model 4P and  a  Radio  Shack  (Western
     Digital)  hard  disk controller, then the HBUILD6 utility is
     the only item needed.

     If you have a Model 4P and a MISOSYS disk controller  (XEBEC
     or Adaptec), then the Model 4P boot-ROM must be replaced.

     If you have a Model 4 or 4D, the boot ROM must  be  replaced
     with  one that knows how to operate a Radio Shack or MISOSYS
     hard disk system.

     All you have to do is specify the correct part  number  when
     you  order HBUILD6 and you will get the software and the ROM
     (if required) that your system needs.

***     Model 4 owners must also make sure they have the  correct
     "A" ROM in their systems.  The method for determining if you
     have an old "A" ROM is in the XROM/XDROM description in  the
     catalog.

Q:      I have Radio Shack and MISOSYS hard disk systems  that  I
     use  one  at  a  time on my computer.  Can I switch back and
     forth and still have boot capability?

A:      The code in the ROM is completely different for  the  two
     disk  controllers.  The code that HBUILD6 places in the hard
     disk boot track is also written to talk to a single type  of
     controller.  Both cannot be supported at the same time.  You
     could boot off the hard disk  automatically  with  one  disk
     system  and  continue  to  use  a  start-up diskette for the
     other.

Q:      Once my system can boot off the hard disk, how do I force
     the system to boot off a floppy?

A:      On a Model 4 or 4D, the XROM will always attempt to  boot
     from floppy drive 0 first.  If there is no floppy present or
     the drive door is open, it will then boot off  of  the  hard
     disk drive.  This identical to how most MS-DOS systems work.

     On a Model 4P, the boot ROM always tries  to  boot  off  the
     hard  disk  first.  If you don't want that, press the F2 key
     as you have done in the past.

Q:      How much memory does HBUILD6 require?

A:      HBUILD6 requires no more memory than your hard disk drive
     is  using  now.   HBUILD6 simply arranges for your hard disk
     driver to be loaded when the system starts to  boot  instead
     of later as part of the sysgen configuration.

Q:      Does HBUILD6 expect certain drivers to  be  used  and  do
     they have to be placed in a particular location?

A:      The hard disk driver can either be in low or high memory,
     but  it must be either the first driver loaded in low memory
     (lowest address) or the first driver loaded in  high  memory
     (highest address).  If your system is not already configured
     this way, it can be  with  minimal  effort.   A  utility  is
     included  with  HBUILD6  that  can be used to force the hard
     disk driver  into  high  memory.   (Systems  that  used  the
     automatic  installation  program provided by Radio Shack are
     correctly configured.)

     The currently-supported hard disk drivers are:
             TRSHD6/DCT      (Radio Shack hard disk drivers)
             RSHARD6/DCT     (MISOSYS hard disk drivers for Radio Shack hardware)
             MSCSI6/DCT      (MISOSYS hard disk drivers for MISOSYS hardware)

     Other types of drivers are not supported at this time.  (We are interested
     in hearing which ones should be provided.)

Q:      Can HBUILD6  and  XROM/XDROM  be  used  with  the  XLR8er
     adapter?

A:      The XLR8er adapter is ignored by HBUILD6.   It  does  not
     care  if  it is present or not.  However, the standard Houde
     accelerator patches conflict with HBUILD6.   To  avoid  this
     problem,  a  utility called XLR8SET is included with HBUILD6
     that provides the same improvements that the  Houde  patches
     offer,  but  uses  less  than  40 bytes of low memory.  (The
     standard Houde patches use over 125 bytes.)

     If you have a Model 4 or 4D system, you must  indicate  that
     your  system  has  a  XLR8er  adapter.   One  version of our
     XROM/XDROMs are designed to be used with a different  64180-
     based accelerator that has to be programmed differently than
     the XLR8er adapter.

Q:      Can HBUILD6 and XROM/XDROM be used with a SmartWatch?

A:      HBUILD6 does not care if a SmartWatch  is  present.   The
     sole  task  of HBUILD6 is to start the boot process and that
     code runs for less than a second.

     The XROM/XDROM also do not care about the  presence  of  the
     SmartWatch  as  they are normal EPROMs.  (The code contained
     within  these  parts  does  not  access   the   SmartWatch.)
     However,  the  combination  of  a  SmartWatch  and  a XLR8er
     adapter has been reported to cause problems.   The  problems
     occur  when  accessing  the  SmartWatch.  The problem is not
     unique  to  the  XROM/XDROM,  and   happens   with   certain
     manufacturers  masked  ROMs  straight from Radio Shack.  The
     problem is cause by the XLR8er adapter accessing the ROM too
     quickly.   Although most people have put faster RAM in their
     machines, the ROMs remain as fairly slow devices.  This  can
     be  resolved  by  using the XLR8SET utility to delay setting
     the XLR8er adapter to its maximum operating speed until  the
     clock has been read.

     Original Model 4 systems only:
     In addition to the  above  example  of  the  XLR8er  running
     faster  than the ROMs (and the SmartWatch) can handle, there
     are some non-Radio Shack modifications that defeat the  wait
     states  that  are  generated  in original Model 4 systems to
     ensure  that  accesses  to  the  RAMs  and  ROMs  (and   the
     SmartWatch)   are   long   enough   to   meet   the   timing
     specifications  of  these  parts.    The   intent   of   the
     modifications  was  to  remove  1  or 2 wait states that are
     present in the Model 4 systems (not in 4D or 4P) when faster
     RAM  is  installed.  However, the bypassed hardware was also
     supposed to delay access to the ROM's and this  function  is
     still  needed.   If  your system has these modifications, we
     cannot guarantee that your system will work correctly with a
     EPROM installed instead of a masked ROM.

- - - - - -









































